# MashTree_FASTA

## Quick Facts

| **Workflow Type** | **Applicable Kingdom** | **Last Known Changes** | **Command-line Compatibility** | **Workflow Level** |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [Phylogenetic Construction](../../workflows_overview/workflows_type.md/#phylogenetic-construction) | [Bacteria](../../workflows_overview/workflows_kingdom.md/#bacteria) | PHB v3.0.0 | Yes | Set-level |

## MashTree_FASTA_PHB

`MashTree_FASTA` creates a phylogenetic tree using Mash distances.

Mash distances are representations of how many kmers two sequences have in common. These distances are generated by transforming all kmers from a sequence into an integer value with hashing and Bloom filters. The hashed kmers are sorted and a "sketch" is created by only using the kmers that appear at the top of the sorted list. These sketches can be compared by counting the number of hashed kmers they have in common. Mashtree uses a neighbor-joining algorithm to cluster these "distances" into phylogenetic trees.

This workflow also features an optional module, `summarize_data`, that creates a presence/absence matrix for the analyzed samples from a list of indicated columns (such as AMR genes, etc.) that can be used in Phandango.

### Inputs

/// html | div[class="searchable-table"]

{{ input_table("docs/assets/input_tables/all_inputs.tsv", input_table=True, filter_column="Workflow", filter_values="MashTree", columns=["Terra Task Name", "Variable", "Type", "Description", "Default Value", "Terra Status"], sort_by=[("Terra Status", True), "Terra Task Name", "Variable"]) }}

///

### Workflow Actions

`MashTree_Fasta` is run on a set of assembly fastas and creates a phylogenetic tree and matrix. These outputs are passed to a task that will rearrange the matrix to match the order of the terminal ends in the phylogenetic tree.

The optional `summarize_data` task performs the following only if all of the `data_summary_*` and `sample_names` optional variables are filled out:

1. Digests a _comma-separated_  list of column names, such as `"amrfinderplus_virulence_genes,amrfinderplus_stress_genes"`, etc. that can be found within the origin Terra data table.
2. It will then parse through those column contents and extract each value; for example, if the `amrfinder_amr_genes` column for a sample contains these values: `"aph(3')-IIIa,tet(O),blaOXA-193"`, the `summarize_data` task will check each sample in the set to see if they also have those AMR genes detected.
3. Outputs a .csv file that indicates presence (TRUE) or absence (empty) for each item in those columns; that is, it will check each sample in the set against the detected items in each column to see if that value was also detected.

By default, this task appends a Phandango coloring tag to color all items from the same column the same; this can be turned off by setting the optional `phandango_coloring` variable to `false`.

### Outputs

<div class="searchable-table" markdown="1">

| **Variable** | **Type** | **Description** |
|---|---|---|
| mashtree_docker | String | The Docker image used to run the mashtree task |
| mashtree_filtered_metadata | File | Optional output file with filtered metadata that is only produced if the optional `summarize_data` task is used |
| mashtree_matrix | File | The distance matrix made |
| mashtree_summarized_data | File | CSV presence/absence matrix generated by the `summarize_data` task from the list of columns provided; formatted for Phandango if `phandango_coloring` input is `true` |
| mashtree_tree | File | The phylogenetic tree made |
| mashtree_version | String | The version of mashtree used in the workflow |
| mashtree_wf_analysis_date | String | The date the workflow was run |
| mashtree_wf_version | String | The version of PHB the workflow is hosted in |

</div>

## References

> Katz, L. S., Griswold, T., Morrison, S., Caravas, J., Zhang, S., den Bakker, H.C., Deng, X., and Carleton, H. A., (2019). Mashtree: a rapid comparison of whole genome sequence files. Journal of Open Source Software, 4(44), 1762, <https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01762>
<!-- -->
>Ondov, B. D., Treangen, T. J., Melsted, P., Mallonee, A. B., Bergman, N. H., Koren, S., & Phillippy, A. M. (2016). Mash: Fast genome and metagenome distance estimation using minhash. Genome Biology, 17(1), 132. doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x
